David Schaich (he): Okay, I think we should go ahead and
David Schaich (he): get started.  I'll
David Schaich (he): put the code up on the board for any stragglers
David Schaich (he): I'll put it on the projected notes as well before moving on:
David Schaich (he): at 9AM on the twentieth of March, the 6 digit code
David Schaich (he): 2, 4, 9, 9, 0, 8.
David Schaich (he): For those of you dialing in from off campus.
David Schaich (he): And, what do we have for today?
David Schaich (he): First, let's see if there are any questions about what we covered last week
David Schaich (he): and I'll remind you what those topics were. We focused on
David Schaich (he): thermodynamic cycles using pressure--volume diagrams as a tool to analyze those
David Schaich (he): to find their efficiency.
And looking in most detail at the
David Schaich (he): Carnot cycle that realizes the maximum possible efficiency of a heat engine
or refrigerator.
David Schaich (he): depending on which way it's run. And then in the tutorial he started looking at the Otto cycle, the exercise for you being to check out its efficiency and compare that with the Carnot cycle.
David Schaich (he): you've been
David Schaich (he): turn to
David Schaich (he): our third statistical ensemble for
David Schaich (he): this module, the grand canonical, unsolvable and going through.
David Schaich (he): Video.
David Schaich (he): Let's see
David Schaich (he): function going through the
David Schaich (he): same replica trick that we use for the canonical on the
David Schaich (he): putting in place a realistic on dots for
David Schaich (he): it's particle reservoir with which the system can exchange. Now both energy and particles. We derived the great economical analog of the partition function.
David Schaich (he): some over all microstates, I, the exponential
David Schaich (he): E, to the minus inverse temperature times, the energy of that microstate minus the chemical potential.
the number of
David Schaich (he): so that the corresponding probabilities for microstates, Omega I. Is the generalization of the ultimate factor. We didn't buy it
David Schaich (he): this great canonical partition function.
David Schaich (he): and we will go on today to derive
David Schaich (he): large steel properties of great economical systems from this starting point. But before we do, are there any questions about
David Schaich (he): what we saw last week, or what we got up to in our development of the grand canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): So the plan for they includes not only derived quantities.
David Schaich (he): but also you'll probably get through those pretty quickly and then look into quantum statistics as Yeah.
David Schaich (he): As an intermediate step we're applying the grand canonical partition function to
David Schaich (he): the canonical ensemble to classical ideal gases. So the drives quantities are going to be
David Schaich (he): based on
David Schaich (he): partition function. Our starting point for any mathematical analyses of systems for about the energy and particle number is allowed to fluctuate. and these include some of the
David Schaich (he): usual targets, like the entropy. Now, as a function of temperature and chemical potential
David Schaich (he): rather than temperature and
David Schaich (he): particle number or energy particle number. This was the case in the
David Schaich (he): micro canonical ensemble
David Schaich (he): that remains the same sum over microstates of microstate probabilities pi times their water that holds.
David Schaich (he): or any
David Schaich (he): statistical ensemble. Given the appropriate form of the microstates probabilities.
David Schaich (he): and also.
David Schaich (he): like we did, for
not a cool
David Schaich (he): ensemble. We want to consider the expectation value of the internal energy which flexibility fluctuates from Microsoft to Microsoft. It still has a We'll be fine
David Schaich (he): and smoothly varying expectations, are you? It also depends on the temperature and chemical potential, and as with all the some of the
David Schaich (he): energy 4 inch microstate, with the probability of that Microsoft which we can log in from our work last week.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): and the exponential factor
David Schaich (he): weighted by the overall great economical partition function.
David Schaich (he): So this looks much the same as the canonical case. Just the addition of the chemical potential and particle number for every microstates.
David Schaich (he): The new
David Schaich (he): is not really sensible in the canonical ones. On what is the particle
number
David Schaich (he): just now
fluctuates just like the energy of and fixed. So it's expectation value.
David Schaich (he): Another function of he.
She'll also be varying
David Schaich (he): also the particle number for each microstate waited by
David Schaich (he): microstate probability. so the same expression as a energy
David Schaich (he): exchange with the particle number in the sum of microstates.
David Schaich (he): and continuing the analogy with economical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): All of these can be related to
David Schaich (he): derivatives. Oh.
David Schaich (he): the water room
David Schaich (he): of the great economical partition function.
David Schaich (he): which. in the grey economical case.
David Schaich (he): quantity.
David Schaich (he): You notice the Grand Canonical potential
David Schaich (he): up to you and you. and it's the grand canonical animal of the free energy.
David Schaich (he): which is to say. 5 is negative temperature, times water of that screen economical partition function so rearranging
David Schaich (he): that relation. You can express the partition function just as the exponential
minus 5 over t
David Schaich (he): the microstate probabilities from both.
David Schaich (he): and the cast of the 4,
the
David Schaich (he): single exponential with the one of them. On this bike and positive 5. Mine is Microsoft energy plus New time particle number.
David Schaich (he): all divided by the temperature.
David Schaich (he): and sometimes to
David Schaich (he): highlights the similarity between this grand canonical potential and the help of its free energy. This.
David Schaich (he): Oh, excuse me you land out free energy.
How is it?
David Schaich (he): Twentieth century?
David Schaich (he): Roughly, a 100 years after hell holds and
David Schaich (he): making contributions to many areas of physics, including the you're looking at. Possibly this week we definitely
right again.
David Schaich (he): and one other into It's putting home disease here.
David Schaich (he): These relations.
David Schaich (he): unlike the general definitions
David Schaich (he): about, do assume a thermodynamic equilibrium that we've gone through the process of maximizing the entropy
David Schaich (he): in order to make this relation between
David Schaich (he): the pre economical potential and
David Schaich (he): all these qualities. But that okay said so
David Schaich (he): the claim that these are related. So let's actually see how that
David Schaich (he): operates in practice by looking at derivatives of the screen canonical potential which now depends on both temperature and chemical potential.
David Schaich (he): If we take the derivative with respect to chemical potential
David Schaich (he): when the temperature fixed. then we can pull out that minus t factor.
David Schaich (he): It's for file. It is a minus one over
David Schaich (he): inverse temperature, Beta. And then we have
David Schaich (he): the derivative of the logarithm
David Schaich (he): of the grand canonical potential with respect to chemical potential, which
David Schaich (he): whatever is a G factor
derivative of that G.
David Schaich (he): At some over microstates.
David Schaich (he): Derivative With respect to the chemical potential. all of our exponential.
David Schaich (he): a factor depending on both
David Schaich (he): energy and particle number. So what this will do is bring down a positive that you're a beta times. and I and they will cancel out the one over data.
David Schaich (he): leaving just
David Schaich (he): hey, you one over. So my
that same
David Schaich (he): exponential factor
David Schaich (he): which we can immediately recognize as the microstate probability. We saw it, and making some
David Schaich (he): It' be some A. P. I. One of the words see negative expectation, value of the particle number coming from this.
David Schaich (he): they really about the grand canonical potential with respect to chemical, potentially.
David Schaich (he): So that is
David Schaich (he): the first and simplest relation between some. You derive all the use of interest and
potential.
David Schaich (he): The
David Schaich (he): temperature derivative is
David Schaich (he): similar to a bit more complicated, because now we have 2 terms. The first coming from the derivative of you have a share with respect to itself. Maybe just the one, said she, factor.
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): temperature
David Schaich (he): That's not one of the
David Schaich (he): so for you Let's pull this off
David Schaich (he): 2 separate
David Schaich (he): calculation. It is useful to
David Schaich (he): swap out the temperature derivative for the derivative. With respect to inverse temperature derivative. Of one over T. With respect to t
David Schaich (he): is minus one over 2 squared, which is minus Beta squared.
David Schaich (he): So this to really
David Schaich (he): itself it's minus square. The one gives us one over, he said. Gee! And then we have
David Schaich (he): same some of the microstates
David Schaich (he): as before. Now we, derivative with respect to data
David Schaich (he): and this
David Schaich (he): a negative sign. Times the combination of it. energy and particle number. The parentheses
David Schaich (he): minus Beta squared out front
David Schaich (he): some of the Microsoft energies. We will still have the exponential factor in the
give us that probability. We solve all.
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): it's tactic and parentheses on the chemical potential times
David Schaich (he): particle number. With that overall
David Schaich (he): negative sign
we plug this.
David Schaich (he): Thank you
David Schaich (he): for overall expression.
David Schaich (he): You have a negative for the G, which is just
David Schaich (he): the Grand Canonical potential.
David Schaich (he): I'm for sure
David Schaich (he): screen
David Schaich (he): and then a minus t factor times. Beta squared is one over t squared.
David Schaich (he): and the enumerated the expectation value with the energy minus times the expectation value of the particle number. We're putting everything
David Schaich (he): single expression.
David Schaich (he): the free energy minus internal energy. What the portable number.
David Schaich (he): the chemical potential to bring that to
David Schaich (he): units of energy
David Schaich (he): along with everything else in the single factor of the temperature
David Schaich (he): in the denominator.
David Schaich (he): So it relation between
David Schaich (he): for you the 4 quantities we have to work with the free energy, internal energy and particle number
David Schaich (he): all related to this derivative of the internal. I'm. Sorry the free energy
David Schaich (he): we can make this even more elegant than it already is by
David Schaich (he): considering the last to live quality
David Schaich (he): in our list, to target the entropy.
David Schaich (he): and much as we did. you acknowledged the case.
David Schaich (he): you know, plug in
David Schaich (he): our Microsoft for the arguments to the algorithm and break up that single algorithm of their product into a some of for your algorithms.
David Schaich (he): So P: I was one over. Z. Do we have any
David Schaich (he): minus? One? Is a G. Multiply by the exponential of
David Schaich (he): minus beta time.
David Schaich (he): the internal energy I
David Schaich (he): plus b the U,
David Schaich (he): I'm. And I
David Schaich (he): distributing that overall negative sign and carrying out some of the microstates.
David Schaich (he): is independent of that, some
David Schaich (he): that just comes down, and we get some of her probabilities.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. you know 2 negative signs. I see internal energy, expectation, value, and similarly minus you
David Schaich (he): particle number, expectation, value. which we can recognize. His negative of the free energy.
David Schaich (he): most internal energy.
David Schaich (he): minus particle number. all with that Beta
David Schaich (he): getting a factor of one of the temperature. which is negative
David Schaich (he): of the free energy. That's
David Schaich (he): so. We now have relations between all 4.
David Schaich (he): All of these we started off with the Grand Canonical potential entropy, internal energy and particle number which we can just collect.
David Schaich (he): I see.
David Schaich (he): And this calculation here
David Schaich (he): relations between the 2 partial derivatives of that
David Schaich (he): free energy, the pre economical potential with respect to out of their temperature or chemical potential.
the
David Schaich (he): an additional relation between the internal energy and the derivative of the logarithm of Zen G.
David Schaich (he): You found this a component
David Schaich (he): up to you.
David Schaich (he): matter computation of the temperature derivative
just to pull things up.
We can see you
David Schaich (he): a factor of beta squared time. That expectation value of the energy
David Schaich (he): minus mute times. Expectation. Value of a number so
David Schaich (he): rearranging, dividing by
David Schaich (he): beta squared is equivalent to multiplying by temperature squared. The arguments of
David Schaich (he): derivative
David Schaich (he): is just the free energy divided by temperature with an overall negative silence.
David Schaich (he): Put out front
David Schaich (he): particle number, expectation down to the other side. So that is a another way of writing the relation between
I'm. Sure
David Schaich (he): internal.
David Schaich (he): similar to what we had in the economical case back when the particle on what was fixed.
David Schaich (he): And finally, we have this relation between all 4 quantities.
David Schaich (he): Free energy
David Schaich (he): is equal to
David Schaich (he): the negative temperature times the entropy.
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): moving the energy to the other side of the equation.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. bringing through that negative sign
David Schaich (he): gives us those other 2 factors
David Schaich (he): free energy to the internal energy and
David Schaich (he): political number.
David Schaich (he): So these are
David Schaich (he): the useful set of relations that we will
David Schaich (he): you, just to apply the grand canonical ensemble to autumn gases
David Schaich (he): and extract the large scale behavior from the underlying microstates that we have yet to derive for those particular systems. Are there any questions?
David Schaich (he): Yeah, what we use going through to get from the grand canonical thing
function
David Schaich (he): to all these relations between the microscopic quantities of our economical systems.
David Schaich (he): There's one more thing to say about you relations between them
David Schaich (he): which is now to further generalize the first law of thermodynamics to the
it's allowed to fluctuate.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): if we recall. we started all many weeks ago.
David Schaich (he): like the first law of thermodynamics was simply a conservation of energy and fancy terminology for that hopefully familiar concept. And then.
David Schaich (he): when we moved from the micro canonical ensemble that implemented the conservation of energy directly
David Schaich (he): to the canonical ensemble that allowed the internal energy to actually, by exchanging heats or doing work on the environment to our system.
David Schaich (he): ended up generalizing the first of all, 2
David Schaich (he): case number 5,
David Schaich (he): just for slightly more compact notation. Only both the expectation values. And just remember that
David Schaich (he): Yeah, internal energy is
David Schaich (he): the fluctuating quality.
David Schaich (he): It's the expectation value that is. we'll define it as a function of
David Schaich (he): temperature and particle number of the canonical case. We generalize the first law to this relation the internal energy is allowed to change.
David Schaich (he): but only by exchanging either he
David Schaich (he): temperature times. a change in entropy with the environment. or by having work done on it. We're doing work on this environment. You can see a personal work, theme
David Schaich (he): the Pressure Times. Any change in the volume of the system.
David Schaich (he): So. keeping this
David Schaich (he): set up of he
David Schaich (he): system in a volume V. And returning to the Grand Canonical case. we still have these possible ways of exchanging energy with the external particle reservoir by the through heat or work.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): now we have the additional possibility.
David Schaich (he): there being a change.
part of it.
David Schaich (he): Number
David Schaich (he): which was not allowed in the canonical framework.
David Schaich (he): So if we consider the entropy as a function of internal energy. volume and particle number, the 3 control parameters that we've
have
David Schaich (he): a generic grand canonical system
for you.
David Schaich (he): I can
David Schaich (he): expand, and you change the entropy.
David Schaich (he): Yes. some partial where it is with respect to each of those 3 control parameters.
David Schaich (he): 2 or 8 this year for you.
This.
David Schaich (he): and also
David Schaich (he): particle number
David Schaich (he): we can
David Schaich (he): recognize. I'm, all the way back in I'm. Working on the the change in entropy
number
David Schaich (he): is that inverse temperature?
David Schaich (he): You, Don't? You have an interpretation of the
David Schaich (he): change in the interview with respect to volume, but we also saw just last week.
David Schaich (he): at the analogous response to the entropy to a change. A particle number with fixed energy is the
David Schaich (he): actually negative chemical potential divided by it. The temperature you went through. Why, that negative sign is there. And yeah, chemical, potential and temperature have
David Schaich (he): the same units that cancel
David Schaich (he): in this expression.
David Schaich (he): So if we focus now on the partial derivative that's like UN evaluated here certain guests. this is this is going to come out to be related to the pressure
David Schaich (he): which we can confirm. Thanks to the fact that we fixed the
David Schaich (he): particle number and the energy
David Schaich (he): in this partial, derivative What do you fixed particle number
David Schaich (he): allows us to go back to
David Schaich (he): everything we've
David Schaich (he): derive and work through for the I don't like the ensemble. We consider this partial. And
David Schaich (he): yeah. then we need a snaps.
David Schaich (he): The change in the that. We have an economical case given by it. This
David Schaich (he): previous generalization of the first law of thermodynamics. Tds minus P. TV, he is
David Schaich (he): vanishing for the energy to be fixed, so rearranging this
David Schaich (he): consume later.
David Schaich (he): That
David Schaich (he): is the ratio on the other side of that equality.
David Schaich (he): So the
David Schaich (he): general generalization of the first law of thermodynamics which it's sometimes called. Do you
David Schaich (he): generalized?
David Schaich (he): Yeah. the late essentially all of the control parameters at our disposal for your grand canonical system. We rearrange this expansion of the change, the energy multiplying through by
David Schaich (he): the temperature that appears in every one of these 3 terms. I'm. Giving you
the same form as the generalized person. On the
David Schaich (he): In the canonical case
David Schaich (he): we have again a temperature of times change in entropy.
David Schaich (he): Pdv. Except a negative sign, and from going on the other side of the equations.
David Schaich (he): and then negative
David Schaich (he): sign on with the chemical potential.
David Schaich (he): And we have a third term that was not possible in the canonical case. but the change in energy is given by it. Temperature, change and entropy. Yeah. minus pressure, time, changing volume plus chemical potential
David Schaich (he): change the particle number.
David Schaich (he): and this is some. This is final third term.
David Schaich (he): It's referred to as
David Schaich (he): the chemical work in analogy to the chemical work, that
to
David Schaich (he): the volume changing that they given pressure
David Schaich (he): the idea of being that
David Schaich (he): a change in particle number particle slowing into our out of the system effectively. It does some work
David Schaich (he): the system with surroundings based on how much energy. How are you? By each of those particles that are flowing into an out of the system. Yeah.
David Schaich (he): amount of energy is given by this chemical potential.
David Schaich (he): And that may not. The obvious just based on what we've discussed about the chemical potential previously is related to change in entropy. With respect to a change in particle number.
David Schaich (he): we can actually extract that from this generalized term of the name.
Let me see this
David Schaich (he): info.
David Schaich (he): all wrapped up in a compact form in this expression
David Schaich (he): extract by simplifying this relation of seeing
David Schaich (he): what comes out of it. So
David Schaich (he): how's it? You
David Schaich (he): 3, for example.
David Schaich (he): fixing the particular number.
The volume of the system
David Schaich (he): we have at the change in energy is given by just
David Schaich (he): T. Times. The change in entropy. the other 2 terms vanish and rearranging this. you calling me one over temperature given by the differential factor of
David Schaich (he): entropy in respect to energy
David Schaich (he): right here that the particle, number and volume is fixed which gets us back to
David Schaich (he): the
micro economical definition of the temperature.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, we you
David Schaich (he): so many weeks ago and confirmed obes, our physical intuition about heat exchange.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): how the temperature of 2 objects.
David Schaich (he): I better put it to the thermal contact approach.
Yeah. Sensible temperature in between with you.
David Schaich (he): So that is
David Schaich (he): a send me check that in general.
David Schaich (he): some of the way we fix
David Schaich (he): another pair of
David Schaich (he): the differential actors in this equation. So in and the entropy.
David Schaich (he): all that is left is that the
David Schaich (he): change in energy is
David Schaich (he): the mechanical order minus pressure times. The change in volume and rearranging gives us
David Schaich (he): the definition of the pressure
David Schaich (he): as a change in energy. With respect to boarding.
David Schaich (he): with fixed entropy and particle number.
David Schaich (he): which is precisely the
David Schaich (he): definition that we you
David Schaich (he): started off with when introducing them.
David Schaich (he): The pressure itself and the volume of of an ideal gas as a control parameter
David Schaich (he): in the canonical ensemble that fixes, and by definition.
David Schaich (he): yeah. fixed entropy condition was at that point something that
David Schaich (he): we just had to declare.
David Schaich (he): And this is showing how. from the general.
David Schaich (he): Why is this as a condition of extracting that pressure from the more general expression?
David Schaich (he): And there are several other
David Schaich (he): relations that we can get by choosing any 2 of these.
David Schaich (he): for if it accessible factors to to manage fixing the corresponding qualities.
David Schaich (he): just do one more to
David Schaich (he): you. Get a You look at that chemical potential which will
David Schaich (he): elaborate on
David Schaich (he): what I was just saying before this exercise of fixing the entropy and the volume your left
David Schaich (he): any change in energy being
David Schaich (he): Oops chemical potential times to change the number of particles. What we do.
David Schaich (he): an alternative expression for the chemical, potentially, not as a response of the entropy to change a part of that.
David Schaich (he): the energy fix as the change in energy into a change of
okay.
David Schaich (he): the fixed entropy
David Schaich (he): in a fixed volume.
David Schaich (he): So this. in access to the idea.
David Schaich (he): This you, the intern and the thermodynamic identity, is
David Schaich (he): doing work.
David Schaich (he): It is the amount of energy that has to change in a system.
David Schaich (he): given a change in the particle number such that the entropy
David Schaich (he): remains fixed.
and from
David Schaich (he): what we went through
David Schaich (he): last week, just when introducing the chemical potential
David Schaich (he): in its alternative form as a change of the entropy with fixed energy. Rather than this other way around.
David Schaich (he): we part of you pass. hey? Increase in the number of particles keeping it
David Schaich (he): energy fixed.
David Schaich (he): We can see also from that thermodynamic idea that it would give us back to the usual relation between
David Schaich (he): chemical potential and the derivative of entropy. With respect to particle number.
David Schaich (he): All you've had is some exercise for you just to check. We argue that. and natural systems with positive temperature number of microstates that
David Schaich (he): is accessible with a large number of particles, even with fixed energy it is always going to increase when the number of particles increases.
David Schaich (he): So if we. what to keep the
David Schaich (he): entropy fixed when looking at the response of the energy to a change in particle number.
David Schaich (he): this means that we have to
David Schaich (he): compensate for this increase in the entropy and for natural systems with
David Schaich (he): positive temperature.
David Schaich (he): since the temperature is the response of the entropy to a change in the energy up there. It supplies that the
David Schaich (he): internal energy has to be reduced
David Schaich (he): in order to keep the entropy fixed. In this relation. the canonical potential again for natural systems with a positive temperature.
David Schaich (he): So what we have is
David Schaich (he): a decrease in the energy caused by an increase in the particle number in order to keep that interview. Fix
David Schaich (he): which means that on you
David Schaich (he): it's going to be a negative number
David Schaich (he): to you. It's partial. Derivative
David Schaich (he): used to be less than 0 in order to be consistent with the condition of
David Schaich (he): house in entropy.
David Schaich (he): This is assuming
David Schaich (he): natural systems, where increasing energy, your increasing particle
David Schaich (he): both lead to an increase in the entropy.
David Schaich (he): and this, of course, is.
David Schaich (he): and we started off after wrapping up the dynamic cycles, we introduced the chemical potential
David Schaich (he): from It's all part of the form. the negative
David Schaich (he): partial derivative of entropy with respect to particle number. I didn't but bye bye. yeah temperature. And we saw that
David Schaich (he): this was
David Schaich (he): generically negative, so that
David Schaich (he): and 2 canonical systems are brought into contact with each other, particles will flow
David Schaich (he): for the one that the larger chemical potential, the less negative
David Schaich (he): you to the one with the lower chemical potential, just as keep those from
David Schaich (he): larger temperatures to smaller temperatures.
David Schaich (he): And all of this is now coming from
David Schaich (he): apparently simple one line
David Schaich (he): relation to generalize something like identity that connects
of the large scale thermodynamic properties that we have introduced.
David Schaich (he): and another way. It gives us another way to make sense of the chemical potential as effectively the unit of
David Schaich (he): work. For me.
the energy exchange
David Schaich (he): for a given exchange of particles
David Schaich (he): between the system and it's external particle reservoir.
David Schaich (he): and that is
David Schaich (he): there you
David Schaich (he): last from the German generic.
David Schaich (he): They have one to say about. I mean
David Schaich (he): ensemble just at the foundational level
David Schaich (he): will now change, tax slightly and
David Schaich (he): begin building up to applications of your economic ensemble to
David Schaich (he): ideal gases and specifically
David Schaich (he): ideal quantum gases. So I will
David Schaich (he): just pause briefly here and make sure that we're happy with
David Schaich (he): all of these foundations and
David Schaich (he): relations we've been able to derive physical meeting of them all.
David Schaich (he): It seems to be the case.
David Schaich (he): So we have a few minutes before taking a brief break
David Schaich (he): 1 h to the next.
David Schaich (he): which will give us time at least to
David Schaich (he): motivate or recall previously
the
David Schaich (he): context of it. awesome statistics.
David Schaich (he): and again
David Schaich (he): introducing at least some of the
David Schaich (he): concepts of of the physics in such a way that she any we functions or awesome stuff like that before, in order to make sense of the
David Schaich (he): or scale statistical behavior that comes out of them.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): in good place to start. You know the microphone is beeping because it wasn't like been over the weekend, so
David Schaich (he): you'll see if it holds up for next few minutes.
David Schaich (he): We recall when we introduced ideal gases.
David Schaich (he): we had to
David Schaich (he): regulate the partition function
David Schaich (he): by
David Schaich (he): imposing an ons that
David Schaich (he): only a certain countable number of discrete values for the particle momenta, and therefore the particle energy. Well, that
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): discreet moments of that defined. he said, I
David Schaich (he): energy levels.
David Schaich (he): And in that context
David Schaich (he): we were able to argue that by assuming
David Schaich (he): classical, nominalistic ideal gases for which the plant costs that appeared in the discrete momentum. it's very small compared to
combination of
David Schaich (he): system science. It's a linear extent l in space
David Schaich (he): and the square root of the mass of the particles in your temperature
David Schaich (he): you were able to turn the resulting some over microstates into
David Schaich (he): and well-defined integral
David Schaich (he): over continuously varying values for those energies.
David Schaich (he): The first step 2 more.
David Schaich (he): What we call some statistics is to
David Schaich (he): retaining the discrete energy levels
David Schaich (he): that we briefly introduced
David Schaich (he): a few weeks ago in that classical context. But we will see, yeah.
David Schaich (he): And I think we will get through all this today that
David Schaich (he): this is a necessary but not sufficient condition to
David Schaich (he): get us from classical or non quantum
David Schaich (he): statistics part of the way to quantum physics, but not all the way.
David Schaich (he): So what this will do
David Schaich (he): give us a
David Schaich (he): classical set of statistics. Remember that classical is they sitting in for non- and the particular statistics that the wheel
David Schaich (he): results from a classical treatment of discrete energy levels is
David Schaich (he): known as
David Schaich (he): Maxwell
David Schaich (he): Distribution. where Maxwell is the same Maxwell as the Demon. We talked about briefly last Thursday
David Schaich (he): first day of the Char.
David Schaich (he): I just want to be founders of
David Schaich (he): statistical physics, both working in the 1,800 as well before anyone here any idea that nature was fundamentally quantum.
David Schaich (he): But it will be useful to derive
David Schaich (he): this classical set of statistics, because that will
David Schaich (he): also reveal
David Schaich (he): what is needed for true quantum statistics.
David Schaich (he): Google
David Schaich (he): see an issue in our derivation. Yeah, addressing which will
David Schaich (he): promot those from that classical statistics with discrete energy levels to a truly positive setup, and I should reiterate that
David Schaich (he): not going to go through any proofs or demonstrations that quantum mechanics that we get is
David Schaich (he): surely one is realized in nature that essentially will be an ons for us to work with.
David Schaich (he): that you will be able to look at some experimental data later this week or after the term break
David Schaich (he): that demonstrates
David Schaich (he): that's
David Schaich (he): This gives a good description of
David Schaich (he): a wide range of physical phenomena. but
David Schaich (he): that will be the second step. Our first step is to derive classical max levels and statistics, and you simplify doing so.
David Schaich (he): So we are retaining discrete energy levels.
David Schaich (he): You want to express everything
David Schaich (he): in terms of those, so we will
David Schaich (he): introduce a convenient label for them.
David Schaich (he): We'll call each energy level as a whole the script e. The subscript and for level.
David Schaich (he): and we will see that this energy level E of L
David Schaich (he): has a value of the energy. Excuse me, bye. in normal.
David Schaich (he): subscript out.
David Schaich (he): and we will see it is possible to have energy levels
David Schaich (he): that are distinguished by properties other than the value of the energy that they have. So it is
David Schaich (he): entirely possible, and Indeed, we have already seen the example. We are yeah
David Schaich (he): value of the energy for
David Schaich (he): 2 different energy levels use the same
David Schaich (he): even for
David Schaich (he): sync energy levels. E. M. And E. N. With M. I. Equal to n
David Schaich (he): an example that we saw was
David Schaich (he): for a single classical non-relativistic particle
David Schaich (he): momentum.
David Schaich (he): It's one units. I'm not
David Schaich (he): h bar pi over l in the X direction
David Schaich (he): she couldn't
yeah
David Schaich (he): units there. That that could be the energy level. and
David Schaich (he): the l could be
David Schaich (he): that same units
David Schaich (he): is that direction. We can easily distinguish a particle
David Schaich (he): going in the X direction from then going in the Z direction.
David Schaich (he): But the energies that depend on the inner product. e squared or identical for those 2 different energy levels.
David Schaich (he): So we'll say the situation
David Schaich (he): gives us degenerate energy levels. So some number
David Schaich (he): of energy levels are degenerate if they have the same value of the energy otherwise distinguishable. And we go label
David Schaich (he): all of our energy levels
David Schaich (he): this labeling. You have the freedom to sort the energy well is. so that
David Schaich (he): the values of the energies themselves increase.
David Schaich (he): As your subscripts increase. So as we go from a smaller label.
David Schaich (he): e sub m to a larger label. You sub n. We get to
David Schaich (he): larger, or at least non decreasing values of the energy itself.
David Schaich (he): and without
David Schaich (he): assume that the smallest energy misleading
David Schaich (he): e sub 0 for that ground state that we've seen before
David Schaich (he): is a non-negative
David Schaich (he): energy.
David Schaich (he): This is something that we are free to
David Schaich (he): impose just by shifting our overall definition of the 0 points of the energy
David Schaich (he): without any loss of generality.
David Schaich (he): So based on this labeling of energy levels, the next step is to
David Schaich (he): compute the generic grand canonical partition function that we have now
David Schaich (he): introduced and related to large scale
David Schaich (he): up zoom rules of interest and given the time.
David Schaich (he): Let you take a quick break, and we will come back and dive into that
David Schaich (he): or complicated derivation of partition function based on discrete countable energy levels at the top of the hour at 10. Unless there are
David Schaich (he): immediate questions.
David Schaich (he): I'll plug this guy back in and see how long it lasts in the
David Schaich (he): second half of this morning.
David Schaich (he): Okay, that should be the recording that zoom and
David Schaich (he): assuming no questions, have risen during that break charge on the head as promised to compute the grand canonical partition functions of summing over all
David Schaich (he): microstates in terms of
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): energy levels with the discreet and as yet unspecified value of the energy.
David Schaich (he): So what we can do to
David Schaich (he): make this
David Schaich (he): to organize this.
David Schaich (he): it's a range all the Microsoft to some over in terms of the number of particles that they involved.
David Schaich (he): bye the contributions to the grand canonical partition function.
which is that
David Schaich (he): some over all microstates or generalized it's the fact that it depends on
David Schaich (he): internal energy and particle number.
David Schaich (he): Okay.
David Schaich (he): begin by first, considering the subset of microstates that
David Schaich (he): don't you go any particles. it's kind of trivial case.
David Schaich (he): Usually, if there are no particles. You will declare there will be no energies in this back. It will just be a single one.
David Schaich (he): Things get more interesting when you have the next of all the Microsoft, in which there is a single particle.
David Schaich (he): This has
David Schaich (he): the single particle energies minus a single factor of the chemical potential.
David Schaich (he): With 2 particles. We have the topsy energy minus 2 new.
David Schaich (he): and then so on, for all possible number of particles that our system can have.
David Schaich (he): This is useful if we
David Schaich (he): so label this. Your trivial case is a 0 particle canonical partition function. and we can similarly, for
David Schaich (he): the sums over and larger numbers of particles. all that all of the dependence on the chemical potential particle numbers. So here we have
David Schaich (he): the role factor in the possibly you
David Schaich (he): and then just do some over the Bolton factor, either the minus beta times energy for all single particle energy levels.
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): is just the single particle canonical partition function.
David Schaich (he): How are you worked with quite a bit the context of
David Schaich (he): spin systems, and similarly. you will pick up 2 factors.
David Schaich (he): a pre-factor to a 2 particle canonical partition function.
David Schaich (he): and so on
David Schaich (he): which, in general. we can write as a sum over the number of particles in It's fluctuating in a great economical system. But fix each individual term
David Schaich (he): we're considering systematically. Okay. E to the n value or equivalent
to be
David Schaich (he): the power in
David Schaich (he): multiplied by the in political canonical.
David Schaich (he): efficient functions at some end.
David Schaich (he): This relation between the
David Schaich (he): we economical ensemble and an infinite sum of canonical partition functions
David Schaich (he): is known as the fugacity Expansion. Where this exponential factor
David Schaich (he): is what it's called the you sometimes use
David Schaich (he): you to the
David Schaich (he): E to the chemical potential divided by temperature.
David Schaich (he): And this is useful in part because we have it already. A lot of experience with canonical permission functions that we can now
David Schaich (he): uses a basis for grand canonical analyses
David Schaich (he): in particular for
David Schaich (he): ideal systems. the degrees of freedom going on it directed.
David Schaich (he): If we consider you seem like, it will probably be in particle efficient function. It's just
David Schaich (he): and factors of the single particle partition function
David Schaich (he): and moving to
to be.
David Schaich (he): which is relevant for quantum physics. something that we can take
David Schaich (he): rather than something we will from rigorously here, that just brings in
David Schaich (he): this one over n factorial factor. that correct for
David Schaich (he): over counting of all the different possible labelings, there cannot be all the part in the case. Oh. indistinguishable particles!
David Schaich (he): How we are
David Schaich (he): correcting or
David Schaich (he): over counting the possible microstates
distinguishable particles.
David Schaich (he): So plenty this in
David Schaich (he): yeah pleasant expression for the free economical partition function. some over all
David Schaich (he): possible numbers of particles. hey, one over and factorial
David Schaich (he): z one to the power in the
David Schaich (he): By it
David Schaich (he): I want to an overall factor of the power end. and we can recognize the infinite zone of.
David Schaich (he): say, X. This quantity in parentheses raise the power in with each term the way to
David Schaich (he): one over end factorial. That's the power series with the exponential function.
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): Times, the single particle partition function.
David Schaich (he): So this is the Maxwell Boltzmann.
David Schaich (he): We economical partition function in generic terms. The
David Schaich (he): final step is to
David Schaich (he): puts the single particle partition function in terms of the discrete energy levels
to work with.
David Schaich (he): which is easy, because there's only a single particle.
David Schaich (he): Yes. single particle to Canada occupy
David Schaich (he): anyone of the possible energy levels in turn. So
David Schaich (he): most it has chosen the energy level to occupy
David Schaich (he): that completely defines the
David Schaich (he): microstates. There are no other particles to put in any other energy levels. Every energy level
David Schaich (he): can be occupied once per microstate
David Schaich (he): to the some of the microstates for a single article. This produces to the sum over energy levels.
David Schaich (he): Lower his L. We'll see that there are capital L, so one energy levels where. because i'll take 4 min out of
and a few levels
David Schaich (he): to be working with.
David Schaich (he): But when the energy is in sorry when the particle is an energy level
David Schaich (he): script, e sub l with energy e to l
David Schaich (he): It's economical condition function
David Schaich (he): picks up only yeah. both. In fact, your the exponential minus beta times, the corresponding energy or that energy level.
David Schaich (he): And this gives us
David Schaich (he): partition function that the phones
David Schaich (he): Maxwell postman distribution of maximum statistics
David Schaich (he): plugging this sum into the exponential.
David Schaich (he): we can pull out
David Schaich (he): overall factory that the the the
David Schaich (he): on the energy and some over the energy levels.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. Boltzmann factor for each energy level and then rearrange
David Schaich (he): the exponential factors to pull out to you some getting something that
David Schaich (he): looks a little bit more like the
David Schaich (he): exponential factor that appears in the grand canonical partition function itself
David Schaich (he): that we can't an exponential of the sum to a product of explanations. the exponential, the exponential minus P. That times he, l
David Schaich (he): minus mute. taking the product over all of the energy levels.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): this defines maximum statistics
David Schaich (he): which has these discrete energy levels. L. My canonical position function is the products of exponential
of exponentials
David Schaich (he): or each energy level with the chemical potential.
David Schaich (he): I mean you
David Schaich (he): to counteract the energy out of each energy level.
David Schaich (he): And I made your earlier. That's despite the this could find as energy levels or quantize energy levels. This is not a true quantum result.
David Schaich (he): but actually classical physics
David Schaich (he): that's
David Schaich (he): simply involves a countable number of energy levels. which, of course, is how maximum Boltzmann would have
David Schaich (he): understood that this sort of thing back in the 18 hundreds.
David Schaich (he): What is means is that in our derivation of the Maxwell has been granted a partition function. There was some assumption of classical or nonprofit physics
David Schaich (he): that was
David Schaich (he): in one step that seems sensible to to all of you. No one objected to it. You trust me.
David Schaich (he): They they claim that turns out to why, on
David Schaich (he): and assumption of the classical physics.
David Schaich (he): and i'll tell you what we assumed.
David Schaich (he): which, without saying so, so there was a hidden assumption that every one of the in the
David Schaich (he): was in a different energy level.
David Schaich (he): I did not make this claim explicitly. It was hidden
David Schaich (he): in the
David Schaich (he): and particle canonical, proficient function
David Schaich (he): that we worked with
David Schaich (he): as and powers of the single particle proficient function with this one over n factorial factor to correct for the over counting
David Schaich (he): of the labeling that we do not have with indistinguishable particles.
David Schaich (he): So we can
David Schaich (he): see how
David Schaich (he): this breaks down, depending on
David Schaich (he): what energy levels the particle is occupied just by considering a simple case. We are
David Schaich (he): there are
David Schaich (he): just 2 particles and see a small number of energy levels
David Schaich (he): within to occupy. So we will go through absolutely
David Schaich (he): full detail. The 2 particle partition function
David Schaich (he): with L. A. Plus 4, and the sum over energy levels. So there are our total with 5 energy levels to consider from E. 0 up to V. 4, and you will see that all 5
David Schaich (he): how these energy levels are degenerate. So they all have it
David Schaich (he): an energy equal to 0. That is.
David Schaich (he): it'd be me to do, because then our single particle proficient function that some from 0 to 4 E to the minus beta times
David Schaich (he): That's just the sum over all of one
David Schaich (he): which just counts
David Schaich (he): the number of microstates in particular. This generalizes the end particle partition function with all these energy is equal to 0. Similarly, accounts all of the
David Schaich (he): possible microstates with n particles. So this is the same mathematics.
It is
David Schaich (he): counting the number of ways to
David Schaich (he): place in
David Schaich (he): L 1 1 5 boxes.
David Schaich (he): So specifically we have
David Schaich (he): screen.
David Schaich (he): we can picture. This is 5 energy levels in a row.
David Schaich (he): We have
David Schaich (he): 2 particles to a place within them. You could
David Schaich (he): please those 2 particles in 2 different energy levels.
David Schaich (he): for it is also possible to
David Schaich (he): place both of them the State energy level.
David Schaich (he): And then we will simply have that energy level account the twice in the
David Schaich (he): contribution to the grand canonical partition function coming from this particular
David Schaich (he): micro-states
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): next page.
David Schaich (he): It's make sure that this setup is clear.
David Schaich (he): So.
David Schaich (he): looking at first the
David Schaich (he): case where all where both of these 2 particles are distinguishable.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): let me ask you how many microstates. they all right, so
the 2 particles
David Schaich (he): be distinguishable.
David Schaich (he): This will not be the
David Schaich (he): He's in awesome statistics, but so perfectly well
David Schaich (he): motivated classically, and so
so you have one of those
David Schaich (he): halls being read.
David Schaich (he): the other being blue.
you can keep track of it.
David Schaich (he): Which energy level, the red particle which energy level of the
David Schaich (he): partition function for n equals 2 is then just counting the
David Schaich (he): number of microstates and a number of ways of arranging these 2 particles into 5 energy levels.
David Schaich (he): You want to shout out what number that is.
David Schaich (he): either in the room or remotely connected
David Schaich (he): in zoom.
David Schaich (he): And how do you get that?
David Schaich (he): It's almost there?
David Schaich (he): What it turns out to be is not to the 5, but 5 to the 2.
David Schaich (he): It's for the first particle there are 5 energy levels. It could go in.
David Schaich (he): and for each of those fires that
David Schaich (he): the blue particle can go on any of the other 5 energy levels.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): almost there just stop
thinking of the spin systems
David Schaich (he): instead of this assignments of particles to boxes. But hmm. good efforts that gives us 25 microstates for this.
David Schaich (he): If we then go back to
David Schaich (he): you can
David Schaich (he): that we will be interested in for it Quantum particles you would therefore
David Schaich (he): claim, based on that are
David Schaich (he): assumption of over-counting these essential microstates.
David Schaich (he): The next there should be
David Schaich (he): one over. 2 factorial is a half times 25
David Schaich (he): is well and halfways
David Schaich (he): out of
David Schaich (he): putting these calls into the different boxes.
Even that we are
David Schaich (he): counting a discrete number of possibilities. The only sensible results for the partition function as we have set things up is
David Schaich (he): well, there's an integer, number of ways. Just a positive integer that's counting a number of possibilities.
David Schaich (he): It is 12. Point 5, yes. simply cannot be correct.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): to see where we went wrong.
David Schaich (he): We can just
David Schaich (he): looking full detail at all 25
David Schaich (he): of the microstates that are contributing
David Schaich (he): to the
David Schaich (he): So if we
David Schaich (he): see, take these 5 boxes and label the one with the red ball in it by
David Schaich (he): our labeled One with the Blue Ball. It be, you know.
David Schaich (he): label the empty boxes by Zeros. We can have
David Schaich (he): hopefully 25 possibilities. So let's see what we get with the first box.
David Schaich (he): the Google in some other box.
and then
David Schaich (he): shift the
David Schaich (he): and shift the Google i'm logging on Youtube. Make sure I don't
David Schaich (he): over count any of these possibilities.
David Schaich (he): So I think that's all of the ways for the
David Schaich (he): Red ball to come first before the let me just reverse you. And yeah. another set of and possible
David Schaich (he): micro states.
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): finally squeezed into the side. Here we have the possibility for both of these particles to
David Schaich (he): occupy the same energy level
label that by a 2,
David Schaich (he): so all to particles in one of these 5
David Schaich (he): energy levels. So yes, we do have 5 columns with 5 rows of the 25 microstates, and we can distinguish the
David Schaich (he): these first 20.
David Schaich (he): You see that it's a set of 10. With that coming first before the new particle. another set of 10 with Lumen red and just reversed.
David Schaich (he): So if we now go to the case of
David Schaich (he): 2 particles being indistinguishable no longer. It was labeled by the one of these 2 sets, the different by labeling that corresponds to
David Schaich (he): one factorial sorry. One over 10 factorial is half n equals 2. That correct that over counting as we have with this last column.
David Schaich (he): where the particles are occupying the save energy.
David Schaich (he): There was no over accounting in the first place. and no one over end factorial is needed to correct it.
David Schaich (he): So, as I claim to start this off
David Schaich (he): our hidden assumption when plugging in
David Schaich (he): the usual form of the and particle economical partition function was that all of the particles
David Schaich (he): occupying a different energy levels.
David Schaich (he): That's when the labeling
David Schaich (he): brings in a multiplicative factor
David Schaich (he): for
David Schaich (he): going from distinguishable to in the central particles. and that
David Schaich (he): over counting is not present and should not be corrected
David Schaich (he): when there is any sort of multiple accuracy. So going to large numbers of particles, it doesn't need to be the case that all of them are in the
David Schaich (he): same energy level. It's just that the
David Schaich (he): over counting factor will pick up correct for only cases where some particles are in different energy levels. So we can
David Schaich (he): start to have the impression that if you want to keep track of the over a back over accounting to correct
David Schaich (he): in this case and discrete energy levels. Oh, you're going to some very complicated. We'll keep it to. Do you know your your case is starting from the single party application function
David Schaich (he): and building up from there. So it can be classical case.
David Schaich (he): Where are you just used the
David Schaich (he): discretization of the energy levels as an to regulate the system and give us a
David Schaich (he): partition function.
David Schaich (he): usually safe to assume continuously varying. and she is
David Schaich (he): which makes it effectively impossible for 2 particles to have exactly the same energy to an infinite number of decimal places. So that, basically given teams.
David Schaich (he): we all particles all right. different energy levels.
David Schaich (he): and the
David Schaich (he): one over n factorial correction for over counting is correct in that classical context.
David Schaich (he): If you want to.
David Schaich (he): the more careful and more precise. we should. will benefit us to rearrange this calculation, so that we don't need to keep track of how many microstates have
David Schaich (he): people with different energy levels, and how many have them? The same energy level.
David Schaich (he): What we can do
David Schaich (he): is redefine. The concept of occupation number now not referring to It's like a trick that is. we used to provide the grand canonical
David Schaich (he): partition function. But instead referring to the number of particles
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): each
David Schaich (he): energy level, you still at all. and instead of the
David Schaich (he): classical approach of considering
David Schaich (he): a single particle partition function
David Schaich (he): for each of the n particles.
combining them
David Schaich (he): with
correction for over counting
David Schaich (he): quantum statistics, you know, with the energy level
David Schaich (he): in the driver's seat. and so we flip this consideration on its head.
David Schaich (he): So we don't go through each particle, and some of what energies it could have.
David Schaich (he): Quoting statistics.
David Schaich (he): We go
David Schaich (he): over each energy level
David Schaich (he): and consider the number of particles that can be occupied. Yet
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): some over the part of the occupation number
David Schaich (he): for each
David Schaich (he): energy level.
David Schaich (he): and also from the simple example that we went through in full detail. we can confirm that we are to do this.
David Schaich (he): We don't end up with this dilemma.
David Schaich (he): possibly over counting states, and then having to correct for that over counting It's some statistics approach. considering each energy level in turn.
David Schaich (he): something over its occupation number.
David Schaich (he): I'm. Sure some of the only accounts the you
David Schaich (he): valid or legitimate microstates and don't have to
David Schaich (he): correct after the backed for
David Schaich (he): okay
David Schaich (he): over counting in the sensible particles that have
David Schaich (he): the same microscope to labeling. So I
David Schaich (he): I've gone a bit slowly through this
David Schaich (he): second conceptual step that it's added to the quantized energy levels in order to define calls and statistics
David Schaich (he): just because it is a bit suffer rather than summing over single particle efficient functions. We sum over energy levels
application numbers.
David Schaich (he): and we'll see you some examples. I think we have time. Get through them that will hopefully clarify
David Schaich (he): how this goes in practice. In contrast to
David Schaich (he): media procedure that we went through for classical Maxwell statistics.
David Schaich (he): It has any well check to see
David Schaich (he): if there are questions or objections about this way of rearranging
David Schaich (he): all right treatment
David Schaich (he): of the statistical systems.
David Schaich (he): probably good to move straight on to some examples to illustrate
David Schaich (he): how this works in the contrast with classical, non-hearted physics.
David Schaich (he): So in order to carry out this sum over
David Schaich (he): all possible occupation numbers for all of the available energy levels. First question we have to ask is.
David Schaich (he): what are those possible
David Schaich (he): occupation numbers
David Schaich (he): in the first place. and just to bring in a
David Schaich (he): external information basically facts about the the universe from fall to physics, which we can't consider just an odds.
David Schaich (he): So at the level of quantum physics this turns out to be a theorem called it's been proving in 3 dimensions. There are
David Schaich (he): actually 2 possible 2 possibilities.
David Schaich (he): at least to 3 spatial dimensions that we live in. and lower dimensional systems like
David Schaich (he): particles that are confined to a surface. There are additional possibilities to
David Schaich (he): arrange things in this way. 2 classifications that probably
yes.
David Schaich (he): one class. It's known as both zones.
David Schaich (he): You are named after.
Yeah.
David Schaich (he): Indian physicists. the other my for me, almost named after. and we go for me.
David Schaich (he): and they differ in the occupation numbers
David Schaich (he): that each of their microstates can have. So it's on the case. Any non-negative occupation number.
David Schaich (he): It's perfectly fine. The energy level can be unoccupied. It can have
David Schaich (he): one goes on minute to 3 or so on.
David Schaich (he): I'm. Assuming for the moment that we have a system where all the goes on as far completely indistinguishable. which also turns out to be a feature of awesome physics.
David Schaich (he): the underlying quantum field, that what a particle is
the fundamental level again.
David Schaich (he): and not have to worry about providing those sorts of things we consider identical. indistinguishable fermions.
David Schaich (he): There are. there is a more limited, that set of possibilities in particular, the energy level. It either be I'm occupied.
David Schaich (he): or it can be occupied. and multiple occupancy is not
David Schaich (he): allowed. There are.
David Schaich (he): There's no way to get more than one for me on in a given energy level.
David Schaich (he): I'll mention. Both of these classes of particles
David Schaich (he): are important to
David Schaich (he): everyday life. Some famous Bosons you might have heard of The Higgs goes on
David Schaich (he): quantum particles of light
David Schaich (he): I call photons, which are also bosonic.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. the particle is called high ons.
David Schaich (he): killing 4 atoms or bosons, and many more. How many are everything else in 3 dimensions. So things like
David Schaich (he): electrons.
David Schaich (he): protons.
David Schaich (he): free particles.
David Schaich (he): and the
David Schaich (he): fact that
David Schaich (he): no more than one for me on can occupy a given energy level is going down in history as something called
David Schaich (he): all the exclusion principle
David Schaich (he): named after Wolfgang. All the who essentially observed this behavior empirically before it was derived mathematically from quantum physics
David Schaich (he): share you the derivation of how the succeeding principle arises. Just say that it is
David Schaich (he): thanks to this exclusion principle that chemistry exists, and life can be formed. and it is a
David Schaich (he): fundamental feature of
David Schaich (he): quantum physics.
David Schaich (he): We can go through the rough arguments that establishes why this is the case, and why the 3 dimensional particles break up, and these 2 possibilities
I only do that.
David Schaich (he): I request, because of his getting a bit more. We can't excited things as opposed to statistical physics.
David Schaich (he): Sometimes there is a mistaken impression that this exclusion principle is due to
David Schaich (he): some sort of physical repulsion between Birmingham, that they can't occupy the same space, and that's why they can't occupy the same energy level. Hit up against the shelter. and that is
David Schaich (he): what I want to clarify. Is I'm not actually the case, there's no
David Schaich (he): physical repulsion between multiple fermions in a single energy level. It is actually
David Schaich (he): underlying feature of quantum physics at not hearing a request for details, I will be
David Schaich (he): unexplained and just.
David Schaich (he): You can as and aside
David Schaich (he): to make sure that you have
David Schaich (he): the correct view of. even if you Haven't seen.
David Schaich (he): That's a classification previously.
David Schaich (he): So instead of
David Schaich (he): any more about
David Schaich (he): quantum physics and the exclusion principle let's
David Schaich (he): to step back to that
David Schaich (he): very simple example. We had 2 particles with. I am degenerate energy level 0 through 4. And you went through
David Schaich (he): this full calculation up here. Oh.
a number of microsces for distinguishable.
David Schaich (he): And in this usual particles.
David Schaich (he): Maybe i'll ask you now how many
David Schaich (he): microstates do we have
David Schaich (he): if those indescentral particles are
David Schaich (he): bosonic.
David Schaich (he): That's right.
David Schaich (he): Just quickly label them all as you did before.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): there are 10 min microstates with a single particle in
David Schaich (he): different combinations of energy levels.
David Schaich (he): 5 with the occupancy
David Schaich (he): and the last of these you can guess. The next question is going to be how many you? There are 4.
It's 15 proposals.
David Schaich (he): You don't need to shut that out, or you see that
David Schaich (he): fermions we do not have this occupation number greater than one. So it is only these 2 columns.
you 10,
David Schaich (he): these 10 microstates
David Schaich (he): for me on this. So
David Schaich (he): both of these quantum possibilities are
David Schaich (he): different from the
David Schaich (he): bicycle
David Schaich (he): results that
David Schaich (he): probably and half microstates.
David Schaich (he): Oh, thank you. That led to Maxwell's and statistics.
David Schaich (he): But
David Schaich (he): I don't think, to notice that
David Schaich (he): Well, both are different from the classical case or the
David Schaich (he): one over n Factorial over counting factor is the
David Schaich (he): is a correct or reliable approximation.
We can assume that
David Schaich (he): all particles are in different energy levels.
David Schaich (he): It both on the and on, in cases, are clearly different from each other
exactly.
David Schaich (he): There are different microstates
David Schaich (he): in those 2 cases
David Schaich (he): means that there
David Schaich (he): statistics
David Schaich (he): are going to be different from each other
David Schaich (he): as well as
David Schaich (he): classical maximum case.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): you shouldn't have enough time to go through at least one, and possibly both of these possibilities. So we'll start with
David Schaich (he): Bosons. We're
David Schaich (he): The resulting statistics is known as the
David Schaich (he): It was Einstein in that distribution, with those on the side
David Schaich (he): statistics where
David Schaich (he): so just to get a concrete illustration of the generic and possibly subtle procedure that
David Schaich (he): we talked about it before introducing.
David Schaich (he): So, computing a single particle microstate
David Schaich (he): and raising it to
David Schaich (he): you, want to.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): over the energy levels
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): over the possible occupation numbers
David Schaich (he): for each of those under 2 levels.
David Schaich (he): it is still useful to consider the simple case. the single possibility. So now this is rather than just a single particle
David Schaich (he): partition function. This is a system. the single energy level. So the ground state is the only state.
David Schaich (he): The corresponding energy is that capital block capital with me sub 0, and the microstates are
David Schaich (he): completely specified, and it could not be specified. My.
David Schaich (he): both the
David Schaich (he): occupation number for this single energy level. So n 0,
David Schaich (he): which determines the total energy
David Schaich (he): of the system that goes into
correct, not partition functions.
David Schaich (he): Micro state energy is the
David Schaich (he): number of particles times the energy of the single allowed energy level. Let's see occupation number times that energy, level energy.
David Schaich (he): I apologize for reusing capital 8 in 2 different ways.
David Schaich (he): Wasn't able to see a way to avoid that. Given the number of different energies that we have to worry about.
David Schaich (he): and it is the soft script I for microstates and L for energy levels that will help to distinguish those so
David Schaich (he): pre economical
David Schaich (he): partition function with a single energy level.
David Schaich (he): It's given by and some over occupation that we're from 0 to infinity of the exponential factor of
David Schaich (he): E to the minus inverse temperature times.
David Schaich (he): Microsoft
David Schaich (he): occupation number of times.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. Energy from this energy level. minus mu times, the number of particles
David Schaich (he): in the
David Schaich (he): system, in the microstates, which is also that
David Schaich (he): single particle number.
David Schaich (he): We can pull out this overall factor of the occupation number in the so we have some over all. and 0, the exponential factor.
David Schaich (he): you, the minus V, that E 0 minus chemical potential. all raised the power and 0,
David Schaich (he): which is the
David Schaich (he): geometric series
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): sums to one over one minus X. Where X is this exponential factor?
David Schaich (he): We'll put it out.
David Schaich (he): maybe
David Schaich (he): concerned with the
David Schaich (he): geometric series only converges
David Schaich (he): with him. It's expansion. Parameter X is less than one, so that's this exponential factor
David Schaich (he): used to be less than one.
David Schaich (he): Assuming a natural positive temperature.
David Schaich (he): we have this exponential being less than one.
David Schaich (he): We need the factor in this use also to be positive.
David Schaich (he): Let's see difference between the energy and chemical potential quickly energy.
David Schaich (he): These, for all of these
David Schaich (he): microstates in the those are all the energy levels.
David Schaich (he): even though here we have only a single energy level in general. in order for a geometric series to encourage the energy level will have to be greater than the chemical potential.
David Schaich (he): Given that we've.
David Schaich (he): They will assume that well in generality, that
David Schaich (he): every energy for
David Schaich (he): the energy of this polymer.
David Schaich (he): all the natural chemical potential is negative.
David Schaich (he): This inequality is automatically satisfied.
David Schaich (he): That is one of those natural systems
David Schaich (he): and the last 2 min.
David Schaich (he): We will generalize this single particle partition function to the end particle. I'm sorry. generalize the single energy level partition function to
David Schaich (he): the case of
David Schaich (he): arbitrary number of
David Schaich (he): energy levels from 0 up to a capital L that could be taken to
David Schaich (he): just as the single energy, level occupation, number, define
number of particles for each microstate.
as well as the energy.
David Schaich (he): the set of all capital L plus one occupation numbers.
David Schaich (he): but the Microsoft Energy and article number and yeah
David Schaich (he): microstate as a whole.
David Schaich (he): And since we are assuming. not interacting.
you know, particles.
David Schaich (he): simple expressions for the internal energy.
Okay.
David Schaich (he): some over all microstates, occupation number
the energy for that microstate
David Schaich (he): article. Numbers simply some of the occupation numbers
David Schaich (he): to be an economical partition function. All right there
David Schaich (he): quickly and out.
David Schaich (he): Much of the we have a commentary. Now it has to some
David Schaich (he): occupation numbers. For all of these energy levels you have
David Schaich (he): the same exponential factor, each the minus Beta Times
David Schaich (he): micro, State energy, the sum over energy levels minus the chemical potential, new type, c. Powerful number also be some for energy levels.
David Schaich (he): pull out the common factor of it.
David Schaich (he): And so at the end of that sum. and then
David Schaich (he): break up
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): exponential of the sum into a product of exponentials, each of which will depend only on a given N. 0 and one, and so on up to Ml.
David Schaich (he): So this is the same sort of
factorization. So it factorizes
David Schaich (he): into a product of
David Schaich (he): sounds of exponential factors.
David Schaich (he): one for the first energy level that's on the occupation number.
David Schaich (he): The first energy level, and so on
David Schaich (he): all the way up to the final. And if you love what you have.
David Schaich (he): so we can
David Schaich (he): rewrite this product.
David Schaich (he): Everything is the same up to the labeling of
David Schaich (he): the occupation number and the energy it comes in that energy level. It's just the product over L. Times. All of these geometric sounds.
David Schaich (he): So for you. same convergence criteria, that we had the single energy level case as well
David Schaich (he): generalized to give us a product of geometric series
David Schaich (he): that any more.
David Schaich (he): It's up in this room. Yeah, yeah.
David Schaich (he): I'm grabbing up now. Okay. So
David Schaich (he): I'm: wrapping up the lecture now. But we are in 2 min.
David Schaich (he): and with that I think we all wrapped up a lot of our questions. This was the result. To get to
David Schaich (he): what we can see about it is that
David Schaich (he): there is a similar product to what we had in the classical case. So we're
David Schaich (he): we're dealing with single article, position, function 2.
David Schaich (he): The power of the number of particles. but we have no over counting from this quality approach of something over There's energy levels and then occupation numbers. so there's no need to worry about any
David Schaich (he): factors of n factorial to correct for that. But we're counting
David Schaich (he): so tomorrow i'll probably reiterate this because I want to pick quickly at the end. We will contrast this with all right.
David Schaich (he): and see how both of them
David Schaich (he): return to the Maxwell distribution of classical particles in the classical limits. and define what that classical of it is. That's all. For today.
David Schaich (he): I'm given the need to get the exam set up. I'll just start setting things down right. Now get that recording stuff.